I think the lunar economy is is is one
of the ones that's going to be a little
bit farther down the road. I think one
of the ones that's coming up sooner is
is what's called the lower earth orbit
economy and this refers more to
commercial space stations. One of the
biggest,
you know, contractual competitions right
now is the competition for who will get
the contract
for a private space station from NASA.
So NASA already starting in 2010 as I
mentioned privatized commercial human
space flight with the commercial crew
program. That resulted in the SpaceX
Dragon capability and the Boeing
Starliner capability.
Right now, those vehicles are going to
the International Space Station.
Plan, however, is to retire the
International Space Station. The latest
date that's been thrown out being 2032.
After that point, there would be, in
theory, one or more fully commercially
owned space stations.
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the All Thoughts Podcast.
>> I'm Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Wiesenthal.
>> Joe, have you ever met anyone at a party
and you start, you know, you ask them
the standard question what it is that
they actually do?
>> Yeah.
>> And you just get a response that kind of
blows your mind. It's something that
you've never even thought of before.
>> First of all, can I say my favorite
question at parties is what do you do?
I've heard that that's like, oh, ask me
about my hopes and dreams. I don't care.
I don't care. I don't care. I want to
know what you do. No, I I do. Like, oh,
where do you live? Whatever. Who cares?
I want to know what you do. I mean,
look, in some instances, maybe people
don't want to talk about it, but I
figure people devote a big chunk of
their lives to work. That's a pretty
good icebreaker. So we need to
re-normalize that.
>> Absolutely.
>> And as podcast hosts, we're always
looking for interesting people.
>> That's right. And sometimes you meet
them at parties.
This person that we're going to be
speaking to, we actually met at our
party, our 10-year anniversary party,
someone else brought them. And I was
introduced to him and I I said, "What
What is it What is it that you actually
do?" And the answer that came back was,
"I was NASA's first chief economist."
>> Amazing. Sold.
>> Have you ever heard of that before?
>> I would have I would have not I mean
No, I I definitely would have never
heard of that before. I mean, I guess
I'm not surprised in some sense. I'll
say the one sense that I'm not surprised
that NASA had a chief economist, which
is like economists seem to sort of be in
every organization these days. They have
a lot of tools in their toolkit that can
be applied to a lot of things. They're
pretty good with statistical analysis,
etc. But then also, you know
>> But this is stats in space.
>> Well, then the other thing is, you know,
I know that there's growing interest in
the commercial application of space. And
so satellites are another are one area.
Obviously, defense, um
people talk about
asteroid mining. I don't know if I'll
ever see that in our lifetimes, but I
know that that's a thing people are
interested in. So,
although I would not have necessarily
thought it, you know, I could I guess
I'm not totally surprised that NASA's
like, all right, let's bring an
economist in.
>> Well, I was pretty surprised. I guess
I'd never thought about it in detail
before. But it turns out that not only
does this role exist, but it sits at the
sort of intersection of I guess a lot of
public and private investment in space
exploration. And we've talked about this
before, this idea that NASA has perhaps
been seeding a lot of territory in many
ways to private capital, SpaceX
especially. We've done tons of
industrial policy episodes at this point
and what the benefits are of government
investment versus again private capital.
And so, I'm so I'm very excited to talk
space economics, but
>> Let's do it.
>> truly the perfect guest. We're going to
be speaking with Alex MacDonald. He
served as NASA's first chief economist,
as I said, and he's now a senior
associate at the Aerospace Security
Project at CSIS, the Center for
Strategic and International Studies.
Alex, thank you so much for coming on
Off Bots.
>> Thank you so much. It's a pleasure to be
here.
>> Thanks for coming to our party, too.
>> Yeah. That, too.
>> Yeah, it was a good party. I enjoyed it.
Thank you.
>> Awesome.
>> Excellent. So,
obvious question first, I suppose. What
does a chief economist at NASA actually
do?
>> The position of chief economist is
essentially one of the kind of three
independent technical advisors to the
administrator.
I'll point out that all three of those
positions were
basically canceled at the beginning of
this Trump administration,
but they they had been essentially
people who'd be brought into the agency
to advise the administrator on technical
issues related to economics, chief
economist, technology, chief
technologist, and science, chief
scientist. These are not positions that
are responsible for implementing
programs. They are essentially
independent technical advisors
to the head of NASA. NASA is a $25
billion agency.
It has 10 different centers across the
US. It has international partnerships,
and of course, it has an extensive
amount of contract for the private
sector. And so, the role of the chief
economist is essentially to advise the
administrator of NASA on whatever the
administrator of NASA needs advice on,
but it tends to be related to
what are the markets that we're seeing.
What level of investment can we expect
in a given sector?
Has this company actually raised money?
Or are they perhaps maybe
misrepresented? These are all questions
that come up in procurement and in
strategy.
I started at NASA in 2008. So, that was
when the space shuttle was still flying.
We were beginning to think about
partnering with the private sector.
SpaceX had received its first
essentially contract from NASA,
but it had not launched anything to
space yet. So, as you can imagine, over
the last 15-plus years, the role of the
private sector has become very
significant within NASA's portfolio, and
as a result, economic analysis uh became
one of the types of internal services uh
that essentially the senior leadership
at NASA decided they needed.
>> Mhm.
>> That was fantastic. Just real quickly,
backing up even further, how did why you
in that role? What were you doing prior
to that role such that you got brought
in for this?
>> So, for me, uh space economics uh was a
real passion. Uh I remember very
distinctly uh 2005 when I was a a
master's degree student in economics up
at the University of British Columbia in
Canada, and I remember uh two things
that happened that year.
Uh one was the flight of SpaceShipOne.
This was the first privately funded,
privately built spacecraft to take
humans above the Von Karman line, above
100 km, which is the kind of
internationally definition international
uh definition of of where space starts.
Uh and I remember as an economist kind
of saying, "That's unusual. How long
have we been, you know, building our own
spacecraft and and doing that with
private money?" That started my PhD into
the long-run economic history of space
exploration that became my first book
called The Long Space Age, essentially
on the economic history of where the
money came from uh for astronomical
observatories.
Uh and when you look at that, uh one
will find some very interesting
parallels. For example, the people who
built the largest telescopes uh in the
early 20th century, uh these are the
Mount uh Wilson and Mount Palomar
observatories, uh they were funded by
Andrew Carnegie and John D. Rockefeller,
the two richest people in America at the
time.
Sound familiar?
So, this was a type of parallel that
that that, you know, a number of us were
starting to think about in terms of how
are we going to get new money onto the
table to advance our objectives in space
exploration. And then the second thing
that happened in 2005 was essentially
the announcement of what was then called
the Vision for Space Exploration. And
this was the George W. Bush era plan to
return to the moon, build a moon base,
and ultimately use the capabilities to
go to Mars. And that basically
told me that eventually we're going to
need economists in space because if
you're building a permanent habitat
somewhere else outside of Earth,
yes, that's a technology problem. Yes,
it's an engineering problem. It is also
an economic development problem. You're
going to need to think about where the
revenue source is going to come from
this. Where might you see
you know, cost savings for new types of
technologies.
And so I had decided to go pursue space
economics as a as a field, did my PhD in
that. I used to joke that once you do a
PhD in the economics of space
exploration, there's no nowhere else
that can really employ you other than
NASA.
These days there's such a growth in
venture capital and private equity
investment in space that actually it's a
a bit of a of a booming field to be
honest. So I started my work at NASA
Ames Research Center. So this is one of
NASA's 10 centers out in Silicon Valley.
And I was brought out there to
essentially start doing some of the
economic analysis related to venture
capital. How do we leverage these
private companies?
And essentially as I did my work, I
started managing some of the programs
related to encouraging commercial space
development. Made my way to Washington
D.C.
And with kind of the experiences that I
had in Silicon Valley working with some
of the the investors and some of the
startup founders. Found my way to the
office of the administrator and during
the first Trump administration that was
when the chief economist position was
created.
>> I have so many questions already and I'm
kind of I'm already struggling to choose
a particular path to go down cuz there
are so many. But one thing that that
stood out to me just then, you know, you
talked about the sort of history of
space exploration and the idea that you
had these very rich industrialists who
who funding the early stages of, um, I
guess, astronomy and observatories.
At what point did the US flip into more
of a government-funded
model for space exploration, and how did
that actually happen?
>> Yeah, it's a great question, and I think
it's instructive to think about kind of
how do we develop the capabilities to go
into space in the first place? So, uh,
the history of astronomical
observatories in the US really begins
with these these wealthy funders, and
and there's a mix of motivations. I
break it down to these two types of
motivations. Uh, one are signaling
motivations. In economics, uh, signaling
theory is the idea that you can credibly
transmit information by costly action,
right? Um, this is kind of how you know
something about someone when they're
driving a Lamborghini versus, you know,
say, a
Ford Pinto, right? Uh, you have some
information about the individual even if
you know nothing else. Um, similar with
education. Uh, the classic signaling
product, uh, that I can think of,
though, is, uh, if you know that one
country has launched something, uh,
around, uh, the Earth, and another
country has not, you know something
about the the technical capacities of
that country. Um, very similar in terms
of astronomical observatories. These
were very complex projects. Uh, they
were about billion-dollar projects, uh,
if we do the kind of inflation-adjusted,
uh, metrics today. Um, and so, the
wealthiest people did these things. Um,
fast forward to the 1920s and '30s, when
the technology for liquid-fuel rocketry
is being developed. Uh, this year is
actually the 100th anniversary of the
first flight of a liquid-fuel rocket
>> That's why we did this episode. It was
all time It was all time for the
100-year anniversary.
>> That's right.
>> No, keep going.
>> love a good centenary, you know? Uh,
thanks for thanks for doing that. Um,
so, he's working on this technology
because he wants to be able to go to
space. He receives the vision of space
exploration by reading science fiction
when he's a teenager. He reads a War of
the Worlds,
uh, in his local newspaper, and then a
sequel to it, an unauthorized sequel
called Edison's Conquest of Mars. And he
actually writes in his diary, uh,
about a vision that he had while
trimming a cherry tree
on on his aunt's farm and he decides
he's going to dedicate the rest of his
life to space exploration and every year
after he celebrates what he calls his
cherry tree day.
So he's going out into the world trying
to figure out how is he going to get
resources for this project. And it turns
out that the largest funder for his
early phases
is in fact the Guggenheim family. He
manages to actually convince the
Guggenheim family to fund this work. Um
but when the Second World War starts,
which is really when the US government
starts to get involved with rocket tree
to a very significant level, um he
starts working with a number of the
generals
uh and essentially gets funding to
develop um a jet assisted takeoff rocket
uh to help uh planes take off more
quickly uh and he starts getting funding
that way. So the Second World War is
really when uh governments across the
the world really start to get involved
with rocket tree development, most
famously of course in Germany, but also
in the Soviet Union. Uh and so after
that point, the technology for rocket
tree
uh is essentially co-evolving as a
weapon system and as a technology for
taking humans uh off of the Earth. Uh
that's really when the US government
gets involved. Uh NASA gets created in
1958 after the flight of uh of Sputnik.
Uh and then you have the the the kind of
dual development of essentially the
civil program, which is what NASA is, as
well as uh Department of Defense
programs. Uh and both of them are are
roughly kind of equivalently funded for
for quite some time.
>> Well, what do we talk then about the
flip side or the the other direction?
You mentioned that when you were at
NASA, we still had the shuttle program.
I've never understood I mean, why did we
get rid of that? Like why aren't we
still launching shuttles and so forth?
What was the sort of economic logic or
national security logic or whatever such
that from the perspective of the
government, we don't need to keep
launching shuttles and maybe we can
begin the handoff for some of this more
directly to the private sector.
>> Yeah, it's a great question. I mean, the
shuttle really was an incredible
vehicle. Um, but of course, as I'm sure
you're familiar, um, there were a couple
of fatal accidents with the space
shuttle.
Uh, first the Challenger disaster and
then the and then the Columbia accident.
So,
essentially, the decision was made after
the Columbia accident that there was no
way to make the vehicle sufficiently
safe at a regular rate of flight that
would be economical. Uh, and that it was
time to move on to a a safer, more
economical form of of human space
flight. What's interesting in many ways
with the development of vehicles like
Starship is that the the idea originally
behind the space shuttle is very much
the same idea that is now motivating the
development of of Starship at SpaceX.
Uh, low cost, uh, re- fully reusable,
aircraft-like operations. Um, you know,
that was not ultimately achieved uh, in
the space shuttle. You can look back at
the original economic estimates for what
NASA thought they would be able to fly
the the space shuttle at, uh, and they
turned out to be rather optimistic
relative to what was delivered. Um,
we'll see where we get to on Starship.
But, I think it's just important to
recognize that that it's really part of
the same engineering and uh, kind of
economic capability
uh, thrust shuttle to Starship. It's the
same idea. We want low-cost, reusable,
aircraft-like operations so that we can
do more in space. Ultimately, the
shuttle was deemed to be no longer safe
after uh, after the Columbia accident.
Um, Blue Ribbon Commission was was was
was kind of fielded and and they decided
that it was time to move on to what then
became the commercial crew program. And
that came around at the beginning of the
first Obama administration.
Uh, at the time it was it was very
controversial.
Uh, you can you can certainly uh, you
know, go back and and watch some of the
hearings where you've got people like
Neil Armstrong who were arguing that
this this is not a this is not a good
idea for the nation. Uh, at the same
time, uh, there was essentially uh, a
need within NASA to figure out how to
offload some of the operational
responsibilities for human spaceflight
because NASA was seeking to go back to
the moon and ultimately onto Mars. Uh,
one of the things that's defining for
NASA's strategic landscape
is its budget history. Budget history is
very easy to describe. It starts in 1958
at a relatively low level. It peaks
massively in uh, 1965-66
at the peak of the Apollo program and
then it declines very significantly
until 1972 and it has basically been
inflation flat ever since. Our
ambitions, however, have not been
inflation flat. Our ambitions continue
to increase. And so, as the agency's
been figuring out how do we achieve our
ambitions, uh,
we figured that we would we would
basically uh, partner and figure out how
to leverage commercial capabilities uh,
and private investment.
>> One thing that's really insane, I don't
know if you have you ever seen the chart
of the NASA budget as a share of the
federal budget? It's unbelievable. In
the mid-60s, it fell over 5% of the
entire federal government budget, at
least according to this chart that I
pulled up on Reddit just now.
Uh, no, but I'm pretty sure I've seen
this chart before. I figured it out
right.
>> think I know the one you're talking
about.
>> level of the federal government spending
was at one point through NASA and then
of course it sort of declined into
relative oblivion, but it's kind of
extraordinary.
>> Well, on this note, Alex, you're talking
about NASA's ambitions. How would you
broadly define those? Because it seems
it if you say that NASA exists for
security and as a sig- as a signal to
other countries that we have superior
technology to them, you could justify
basically any element of spending as we,
you know, seem to have done in the
1960s. But if you say that we actually
want some sort of return on investment
in terms of jobs or, I don't know, some
sort of multiplier effect on the
economy, then you're you're kind of
thinking about different things.
>> Sure. Of course, one of the challenges
that I always ran into was that there's
this
perennial request for calculation on the
return on investment, to which I always
had to patiently explain that this is
not an investment, it's an expenditure,
right? You can't actually calculate a
return on investment in the way that you
can for an actual private sector
investment. You can, however, calculate
the economic impact. And so, every 2
years I would be responsible for the
release of our economic impact report.
And for those curious, that is the
highest level resolution data that NASA
releases publicly about where it spends
its money. And it spends its money
across all the 50 states.
>> this is famous, right? It has to.
>> It has to, exactly. Because it is a
public program. It is there to meet, uh,
you know, the needs, uh, of the American
people as determined by their
representatives in Congress. And so,
that is is a kind of part of the
agency's, uh, responsibilities and
mission. And its missions are
essentially defined by that combination
of congressional mandates and
presidential direction, right? Uh, just
like any agency. And so, what are what
have been the consistent requests by
Congress and presidents to NASA? Well,
over the last 40 years, let's take the
post-Apollo era and even the
post-shuttle era, um, we are now, uh, on
the third attempt to return to the moon
and build a permanent habitation there.
Uh, the first was called the Space
Exploration Initiative under George H.
W. Bush. Then it was, as I mentioned,
the Vision for Space Exploration, uh,
under George W. Bush. And today we are
working on the Artemis program, uh,
which I was intimately involved with.
And and essentially it is very much we
are using a different strategy now than
we've used in the past, but it was uh,
it was essentially the same interest.
There's only one world relatively
nearby, only 3 days away, that is the
moon.
There's also
only one planet nearby that you can
plausibly land on. That is Mars. I
happen to personally be a big fan of
flybys of Venus, but that's actually
kind of counterintuitively because it is
so important
>> personally, you don't mean that you're,
you know, flying past Venus yourself,
right? Just in theory.
>> I'd be happy to, but I don't think I've
got the billions for that. But the the
benefit of Venus is that it is literally
so hot and high pressure that it is
impossible to land on, so it stops both
engineers and politicians from trying
to.
That's actually a benefit from a program
management perspective sometimes. But
anyways, the real goal continues to be
Mars because Mars you can land on and
there is increasing signs of the
potential
of potential previous life having been
on Mars. We continue to learn a lot by
our robotic missions there. There's
going to be some very interesting
indications that there may have been a
life there in the past.
It's a very interesting world.
And of course NASA also does robotic
missions out to the outer planets.
You know, the the moons of Saturn of
Saturn and Jupiter are are truly some of
the most incredible objects,
you know, in in in the night sky in our
solar system, right? You have you have
moons like Io that have volcanoes that
spew lava hundreds, thousands of
kilometers above the surface of these
planets. You have worlds that are are
actually ocean worlds underneath these
massive ice caps like Europa
and Enceladus. Enceladus has water
geysers, so it's actually possible to
imagine building
a probe that could just kind of land
under one of these water geysers, open
up an aperture and then assess what
might be in that water. And then one of
my favorites, of course, is the the moon
of Saturn Titan. Titan is the only moon
that we have that has an atmosphere.
It's actually can't really see through
it, but it does have lakes. Except the
lakes are not water, they're made of
methane.
>> Okay.
>> And we now have a a a mission on the
books, Dragonfly, which is for me one of
the most exciting missions that NASA's
doing, to send a robotic helicopter to
this moon of Saturn and explore it to
learn about this different type of
of liquid cycle based on methane rather
than water. It you know, it's a
fascinating solar system and one of
NASA's core mandate is to explore that.
And I could keep going. You've also got
the largest number of Earth scientists
employed by one agency in the world.
Huge amount of the climate data that the
world relies on comes from NASA. It also
responsible for aeronautics basic
research. A lot of the basic research
for
fundamental
you know, green aviation, electric
aviation is is funded through NASA. So,
it has a huge mandate, which is why at
the end of the day NASA's always looking
for ways to to make that tax dollar go
farther,
leverage partnerships, leverage private
sector investment.
>> That was great. Um and I just want to
say like I'm very pro going to space.
I'm very pro landing
on the moon again. I think it'd be
really cool if in my lifetime someone
landed on Mars. I think it's very cool.
But why? So, if there's going to be
private money invested in this other
than the fact that okay, maybe there can
be a return from the private dollars
because they're getting public dollars
cuz they could do more.
From the economist hat, is there
a rationale for some of these projects
that you see beyond just this is very
interesting and cool?
>> Yeah, there's a number
>> turn into return on an investment in the
classic sense?
>> So, so the most classic example that I
have of where the economic return, you
know, came from some of these types of
investments Um, it does come from from,
you know, the Apollo program and and the
early rocketry development uh in the
1960s. So, during that time,
for about 3 years, 75% of all global
semiconductor demand
came from these rockets.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> What does that mean? It means that this
was a technology that was pushing the
boundaries of capability, of technical
capability, and it needed this new
thing, the semiconductor,
uh in order to be effective. That meant
that semiconductor manufacturing got to
scale up at a level that it would not
otherwise have probably been able to do
based on consumer demand.
>> If I recall from Chip War,
it was also the fact that space was
scarce on the shuttle, and therefore it
helped create the impetus to miniaturize
a lot of this technology, which then
unlocked various consumer electronic
goods.
>> Exactly. Uh the Apollo guidance computer
being the other example of that. So,
that's exactly right. So, when you're
pushing the technology frontiers for
this kind of, you know, challenging
objective, like going to the moon or
going to Mars, you do push the
capabilities, and that results in, you
know, the kind of famous case for
spin-off effects. And if there's one
thing that I would just love to correct,
is this idea that spin-off effects are
things like Tang, right? Or
>> I
>> Worth it. We got Tang, worth it.
>> Right. And that's always used as as a
kind of, you know, we say, "Oh, well,
yeah, okay, we got some Tang out of
this. Great." Um, but the reality is
spin-off effects are semiconductors,
right? It is really fundamental
technologies of the modern world.
Another example of that is,
uh you know, the ways in which we now
have um very advanced space-based
internet, right? In part, this stuff
came from a government demand for uh
rocketry, right? SpaceX,
its first major uh service was providing
the government with cargo to the
International Space Station. Well,
that's a pretty high mass demand. It's
not a small payload to get cargo to the
space station. You've actually got to be
able to launch a fair bit into orbit.
Well, once you've already established a
demand for something
uh that is high mass, well, what other
high mass things can you launch up into
space using your existing
infrastructure? Turns out uh
the principal demand for SpaceX's
rockets are its own products right now,
Starlink, and that's also part of the
plan for, you know, orbital data center.
So, these are things that emerge from
having uh
from pushing the technology, from
setting really difficult goals. Um so,
there's a real kind of economic truth to
that whole, you know, Kennedy statement
of we do these things not cuz they're
easy, because they're hard. And when you
do hard things, you create new
technology, new capabilities.
>> Okay, can you extrapolate something like
the semiconductor experience to, I
guess, creating some sort of lunar base?
Because I, you know, I I get it for
semiconductors, we have computers on
Earth. Um that makes sense. But if
you're building a base on the moon, it
would seem to me that for
at least a very long time, your
principal customers are going to be NASA
and maybe the Department of Defense.
>> Right. And also potentially other
international partners.
>> Okay.
>> So, right now, the Artemis base camp, as
it is being developed, is imagining
participation from, for example, uh
Japanese astronauts and European Space
Agency astronauts and Canadian Space
Agency astronauts. Um actually, the US
is committed to landing two Japanese
astronauts on the lunar surface. First
time the US has ever committed to uh an
international partner uh landing on the
lunar surface with it. And we're now
about uh less than a month away,
depending on when the launch actually
happens, from Artemis 2, the first time
that we've returned to the moon since
1972, and the very first time ever that
a non-American will be uh on board for a
mission that is leaving Earth orbit, uh
Canadian astronaut Jeremy Hansen. And
so, uh the international element is a
key part of it as well. Um
I think the lunar economy is is is one
of the ones that's going to be a little
bit farther down the road. I think one
of the ones that's coming up sooner is
is what's called the lower earth orbit
economy, and this refers more to uh
commercial space stations. One of the
biggest, you know, contractual
competitions right now is the
competition for who will get the
contract uh for a private space station
from NASA. So, NASA already, starting in
2010, as I mentioned, uh privatized
commercial human space flight with the
commercial crew program. Uh that
resulted in the SpaceX Dragon capability
and the Boeing Starliner capability.
Uh right now, those vehicles are going
to the International Space Station.
The plan, however, is to retire the
International Space Station, uh the
latest date that's been thrown out uh
being uh 2032.
After that point, there would be, in
theory, one or more fully commercially
owned space stations.
Uh there are companies that are, you
know, raising money. Uh a couple of them
have actually announced the hundreds of
million dollars investments in the last
couple weeks. Uh
what are they going to be doing? Well,
they'll be hosting NASA astronauts.
They're going to be hosting
international astronauts. That's going
to be training. Uh but they're also
going to be conducting fundamental
research in microgravity. Microgravity
is a very interesting phenomenon,
because not only do you have no gravity,
but because you have no gravity uh in in
a pressurized environment, you also have
no convection.
And that allows for uh
different phenomena than you see on
Earth. So, for example, you're able to
grow crystals larger. You're able to uh
develop things like fiber optic cables
more uh more pure that may increase the
transparency of them.
We are still searching
one product that we can actually make in
space sufficiently profitably and make
it again and again and again. We're
still in the R&D phase.
Uh and we've been working on it for a
long time. Uh so, it may be it may be a
while before we see one of these things.
But, there is a huge research effort
going on across the world to figure out
how do we leverage uh the removal of
gravity in the production of many
things. And semiconductors is one of the
other areas that we're starting to see a
lot of investment. And so, I think that
one I think is easier to understand.
It's pretty hard to maintain a
zero-gravity environment on Earth.
Pretty close to the source of source of
mass.
But when you're flying around the Earth,
you you inherently have that that
property.
And people are really exploring how we
can make make new use out of it and make
new products.
>> It's going to be an interesting race,
Tracy, to think like who is going to
make something economical first? Sort of
that zero-gravity space or anyone in
crypto? Where which industry will
deliver something of economic value
first? No, but for real, so speaking of
actual economic value and you briefly
alluded to it in one of your answers,
one of the things you hear is data
centers in outer in outer space. And you
know, like Elon is very bullish on it,
but of course he has a rocket company,
so he Of course he would say so. I can't
tell is this like just thing that like
people on podcasts and Twitter like to
talk about or from your perspective,
from what you could tell, is there a
real plausibility that given intense
compute demands, and I have to imagine
it's like maybe the cooling bill is a
little lower up there,
that maybe this could be like a real
thing?
>> Yeah, obviously one of the currently,
you know, hot debates within you know,
engineering economic analysis in space,
you know, how much sense does this make?
There's actually been a a few folks who
put on really really good calculators
online. So you can kind of look up, you
know, orbital data center online
calculator. And the the the kind of
profitability of it depends on a number
of factors. What do you assume the
launch cost is? How often do you assume
these GPUs are going to fail?
How effective do you assume the
radiators are going to be for getting
rid of the excess heat? There's a lot of
different variables, and given the fact
that we don't have any orbital data
centers of scale, it's hard to know
exactly what their profitability is
going to be. I'll say one of the big
obvious benefits is is not a
technological one. It is simply that you
you probably don't need to go for
extensive permits, for sure.
>> Yeah. No, yeah, for real.
>> But it it it it's a real advantage.
>> There's no space Nimbys who are going to
complain about that. Yeah.
>> Um I mean, you may end up, depending on
how large these things are and how many
of them are and what kind of um what
essentially what reflectivity they have.
So, one of the things that we're now
starting to see is with a constellation
size of of of Starlink, uh these are
about 10,000 satellites in space, right?
Uh the vast majority of satellites that
are in space right now that are
operational are owned and operated by
SpaceX, 10,000 or so.
Um constellations have now been approved
and submitted to the ITU and and various
ones submitted to the FCC um at the
million satellite scale. Already a large
amount of the night sky, people are very
familiar with the flyover of these
satellites.
Um
a orbital data center would be
significantly larger and potentially
more reflective uh than a Starlink. So,
if you've got hundreds of thousands of
these up there, you might start really
seeing them a lot. How much do we care
about that, right? These are these are
kind of social, you know, social public
choice issues that, you know, we're just
starting to think about.
>> Actually, speaking of stuff that we
might be able to see, are space
elevators plausible at all? This idea
that we could have space elevators
instead of rockets to bring stuff um up?
>> I I I love it, you know, I I haven't had
a good space elevator question for a
long time, so thank you.
>> Maybe that says something about their
plausibility, but go on.
>> Well, you know, they're they're they're
fun idea, right? I mean, Arthur C.
Clarke, I mean, it's a beautiful it's a
beautiful kind of vision.
Um
and
the the as far as I understand it,
they're very reliant on um you know,
high-performance carbon nanotubes and
and equivalent technologies.
Um
and the joke I've always kind of
maintained is, you know, I will I will
wait until we have a bridge or a swing
set made out of carbon nanotubes before
I get too excited for
the the space elevator. In order for
them to work, they would need to be
about 36,000 km in length, right?
Because your your goal is to get them
into a place where they are in geo,
somewhere stable. If it's not in geo,
then it's going to be continually moving
around and you know, that doesn't really
work. So it's it's got to be in an orbit
that is basically staying above the same
place on Earth. That's geosynchronous
orbit, 36,000 km away.
So these are these are going to be very
long carbon nanotubes.
So I'm I'm
I'm not I'm not planning on that anytime
soon.
>> Actually, that reminds me. This is
something else we wanted to ask you, but
you know, you're obviously focused on
the economics of particular projects,
but I imagine the technology matters as
well. How do you actually evaluate the
technology? Because as outsiders to this
space space space pun. No, I won't do
it. I resisted, Joe. As outsiders to
this particular topic,
it it's very difficult for us to get a
handle on what seems feasible
just in terms of basic physics versus
what seems feasible both in terms of
reality and also the money that it might
actually cost.
>> Yeah, it's a great question.
One of the things that I loved about
working at NASA was that you know,
you're working with some of the smartest
people in the world and you're all
working for you know, the public good
and you're just trying to figure out you
know, what's the right thing to do for
the country
and
the way that the agency evaluates these
types of technologies and projects is
through teams. And you have a team with
a number of different capabilities and
skill sets. So you'll have people who
are very familiar with systems
engineering
combined with people with experience in
in you know, expertise in material
sciences, throw in an economist, you
know, throw in a lawyer and you all as a
team evaluate, you know, what is this?
What would it take to make this thing
real?
You know, what benefits would it have?
And you know, you do these types of
grassroots engineering economics
assessments of these projects.
Uh, and and part of the kind of, you
know, the the joy is that you tend to do
these things, um, you know, kind of, you
know, dedicated for for for days, weeks,
depending on how long, you know, or how
serious of a procurement it might be.
Um, but a lot of that kind of stays, uh,
you know, stays kind of behind the
behind the door, so to speak. So, we
don't put as much of that out, and when
we do, it'll be in these kind of
procurement announcements where you kind
of will talk about the strengths and the
weaknesses uh, of a project. You know,
if you really want to kind of get a
sense of how the agency does these types
of evaluations, you know, next time
there's a very big procurement uh, that
is coming out of the agency like we did
for the human landing systems to return
humans to lunar surface,
go look at, uh, the the procurement
assessment that the agency does on the
projects.
>> How long are those assessments
typically?
>> You know, they can be dozens of pages,
right? And and they'll get into some of
the technical issues.
Um, you know, obviously there's
proprietary technology involved, so, you
know, it's not like it's it's giving you
the kind of, you know, blueprint
diagnostics necessarily, but there's a
lot of information in them.
Uh, and so, that's the benefit of having
a public agency like NASA is that it
does have to actually put out, uh, these
types of, uh, these types of
assessments,
um, publicly.
>> Wait, are we really sending people back
to the moon next month?
>> Uh, we're sending people back to the
moon, uh,
in a flyby. So, the Artemis 2 mission
will take four crew, uh, in the Orion
around the moon, uh, and then return on
a roughly, you know, kind of week-long
mission, give or take.
>> And then, what's the timeline for when
we want to land on the moon again?
>> Uh, that is the 25 billion-dollar
question. Um, you know, there is a been
a change in the way that the agency has
approached, uh,
its lunar landing efforts. So, in the
Apollo program, uh, NASA did rely on
contractors, uh, relied on Grumman,
uh, you know, the Grumman lander system
uh, that they built, but that was
ultimately owned and operated and kind
of managed by NASA, right?
>> Mhm.
>> With the shift to commercial services
and operations, that is not the case
right now uh for NASA's landing plans.
Uh the landers are owned and operated
and managed uh as services by SpaceX and
Blue Origin. Uh
and so there isn't quite the same level
of uh of of insight and and kind of
certainty. Uh you know, and you might
say that you know, there's some
arbitrary certainty in in kind of
government timelines, which is
absolutely true. Um but we don't quite
know at the same level. For example, uh
NASA has not clarified publicly how many
refueling flights they expect to be
needed for a first lander of Starship.
Uh in part because that depends on the
performance of Starship, and we don't
quite yet know. We're still waiting on
the version three uh flight coming up
here um in the next month or two. So
there's a lot of uncertainty around when
that landing would be. Uh the NASA
administrator uh Jared Isaacman just
announced a change to the Artemis uh
campaign uh inserting a flight in
between this next flight of Artemis 2
and the projected landing. And that
would be uh equivalent to the old Apollo
kind of 9 mission where you're going to
test docking the lander with the crew
module in lower Earth orbit. The agency
suggested actually that uh if both
landers are ready, the Blue Origin and
SpaceX lander may be uh you know, a
lower Earth orbit Orion might dock with
both of them. So long way of saying,
there's still a number of technical uh
steps that need to go. Uh I think the
agency has targeted 20 28 for a landing.
Hm. Um but we will we will see. The
architecture for lunar landing this time
is not as simple as it was in the Apollo
program. It involves a lot more launches
uh to the point where we don't yet quite
even know how many.
>> Talk to us a little bit about Elon Musk
has a Mars obsession, and he's not just
interested in
exploring whatever lakes or potential,
you know, he's actually talked about
colonizing Mars, but I don't totally get
that. I'm sure I could read a book on
it. In fact, I think there is a famous
book that inspired everyone. I got to
read that. But like, there's no oxygen
up there. Must be pretty miserable. Can
Like, what's the idea behind actually
living on Mars? And does that seem And
you know, I have to say, just to back up
for a second, like I don't think we'll
ever see a space elevator in our life,
but I absolutely think there will be one
eventually. And if it happens in a
thousand years, that's a very short time
in the grand scheme of things for human
history. So like But like, okay, so
maybe we don't mean I we never see Mars
in my lifetime. But what is the idea
generally behind the idea that Mars is a
theoretically habitable location that
maybe could be economically productive
or useful to decamp to in some in some
way.
>> Yeah, I I think you're asking kind of
one of the most fundamental existential
questions about our, you know, journey
into space, right? Um
In theory, we have a long time to go,
right? We've got approximately, you
know, 1 million years, give or take,
until this planet becomes uninhabitable,
right?
Uh And so ultimately, uh as H. G. Wells
would have it, it's all the universe or
nothingness, right? Either we manage to
escape uh the planet of our origin, and
we have further experiences and
expansion and adventures out amongst the
stars, or we don't. Uh so part of the
long-run vision is that eventually
humans will figure out how to leave not
just our planet, but our solar system.
However, we do not have uh a a real good
understanding of how we would at all
make that possible today.
And so
part of the thought is we're going to
need to learn how to live out in space
for extended periods of time. Uh the
longest that we live in space these days
is about 1 year. There have been Russian
missions in the past that have lasted
longer in lower Earth orbit, but our our
our medical docs these days at NASA
pretty much don't clear anyone beyond 1
year.
Uh so the idea of of going to Mars has
kind of developed uh over over the
centuries. Um for a long time we thought
that there would be it would be much
more habitable, right? We we we thought
there might be oxygen there. There
isn't. There's a really good book that's
come out in the last couple of years
called City on Mars,
which really kind of goes through some
of these things that you're talking
about, which is
you know, that really might not be that
nice of a place to live. You know,
whenever you get the question "Where do
you want to go?" I often say Venus
because it's kind of a one-year-and-back
mission because ultimately I want to
stay on Earth. It's literally where all
of the restaurants are,
>> Right.
>> There are restaurants anywhere else in
the solar system. And so there's a kind
of sense of that frontier mentality that
I think appeals to some people's
narratives even if they don't
necessarily spend a lot of time on any
frontiers themselves.
And I think that idea of going out to a
new world and learning from that world
is also a different related motivator,
right? There is a scientific interest of
exploration. What can we learn from this
genuinely different alien world
and what can we learn about ourselves by
learning to live on it for decades,
centuries. There's a cultural argument
that some of my friends kind of really
like, which is this argument that goes
back to Arthur C. Clarke, which is that
fundamentally it's about getting
variation in humanity,
variation in the cultures of humanity.
What will we learn? What kind of
different humanity will emerge from life
on other worlds? We don't know.
>> So I know you spoke previously about how
private capital has always had a role in
space exploration to various degrees.
But when you look at 2026, I think some
people would argue that a lot of
territory has been ceded to private
companies like SpaceX.
When when you think about your framework
of looking at this, are there certain
places or things or missions that you
think are better for federal funding to
take on versus private capital?
>> Yeah. For me, the big determinant is
whether or not this is something that is
going to require uh public dollars for
essentially the foreseeable future.
Right? That there really aren't
options as far as we can, you know, kind
of reasonably assess
for there being private markets. So, for
example, on launch vehicles, there were
private markets, right?
Uh
the US went from having essentially zero
market share of global launches in 2007
to now basically having 75% or above
because of the success of SpaceX. There
are There is a global market in launch.
There's also global market in satellite
internet, right? So, these are ones
where it makes sense to have private
companies in the lead. There may be, you
know, kind of natural monopoly
challenges, so you may think about how
do you How are you going to manage that
in the future? But, you know, we do that
in other industries, too.
So, for me,
the reason we're experimenting in space
stations is because, you know, we think
that might be an area where there really
might be some commercial market. We've
actually seen multiple different private
missions that have been paid for.
They're not yet at at kind of, you know,
a a very significant share of the market
for human spaceflight.
But, it's certainly a lot more than it
was 10 years ago when it was zero, and
now it's, you know, a few percentage.
For me, some of the things that we need
to make sure kind of stay within the the
public domain within kind of NASA
management operation includes things
like operating the moon base.
It is going to be a very expensive
proposition. There may be some elements
to that that it may make sense to have
uh private sector experimentation and
eventually even infrastructure
ownership. For example, you can imagine
a world where you might have a baseline
power system on the lunar surface that
is kind of owned by the government, but
if there's kind of interest in expanding
that, well, maybe you have some private
sector kind of, you know, take on some
of the rest to see whether or not they
have some other infrastructure options
there.
If we don't have that privately owned,
then I think there might be some
challenges of of kind of pushback,
right? Uh To what extent do you want
your tax dollars going to fund Jeff
Bezos' moon base versus, you know, the
national lunar research station? Uh, I
think people's answers on that are are
are are potentially different. Uh, and
given the fact that it's essentially
public tax dollars that are paying for
all these things, I think that's
something we need to consider. So, um,
you know, the standard answer is that we
we have the government take on these
higher risk activities where there there
really is no market demand.
But, I also think that we need to think
about this as an infrastructure play.
For a long period of time, we're going
to be reliant on on publicly uh, funded
uh, resources for these things, and I
think therefore there needs to be some
some public management of that through
agency like NASA.
>> We can have private companies doing some
of the lunar services like catering the
uh, the space station. We could get like
Sodexo or one of those companies to
handle that. I I'd be comfortable
outsourcing some of that. What is the
deal with um, lunar territory? Do have
governments tried to claim slices of the
moon? Let's say we land we it was a US
base station on the moon. Would we then
say that that is American property that
area? What does international law
establish with regards to claims on the
moon or elsewhere?
>> Uh, great question. So, this was
actually resolved in the the '60s uh,
with the Outer Space Treaty uh, 1967.
So, prior to any human landing on the
moon, uh, essentially the the powers of
the world including the Soviet Union and
the US uh, and China uh, all decided we
we don't want the same type of kind of
territorial acquisition scramble that
we've seen uh, in human history to take
place on the moon.
Uh,
so there was an agreement that
essentially there will not be uh, any
assertion of of national territory, and
under national law, uh, there are are no
private sector actors. So, essentially
there won't be any uh, ownership of
territory. However, there is ownership
of the assets that you put there. So,
any any moon base that you put there,
any any physical infrastructure would be
American infrastructure. Uh
but
just like in Antarctica, um there are uh
provisions within the outer space treaty
to allow other countries to come and
visit these facilities. They can notify
and say we'd like to come visit your
facility to make sure that, you know,
there there isn't any untoward military
activity happening there. So, so there's
this principle of reciprocity of
visitation that's established. Uh and uh
the idea that we can also mine has
already been established. So, what I
always like to say is that
no matter what business idea that you
have on the lunar surface, you can
probably engage on it right now if you
can make the case with the exception of
property speculation. If you want to go
build a hotel on the moon, you can
afford to do it and you can just put it
down. You'll get the get the license to
do it. You don't own the territory, uh
but you can you can put it there. If you
want to mine something, the uh Space Act
of 2015 that was approved by Congress
and signed into law established that if
you mine it, essentially you own it,
right? So, if you take something from
lunar surface, that's been established.
Uh the Artemis Accords signatories have
all basically signed up to that, so
that's now a very popular proposition
around the world. And if you think about
it, we've already established that. And
when we brought back rocks from the
Apollo program, no one debated that the
United States could essentially uh do
what it wanted with that, and US gave it
a route to countries around the world,
used it for scientific purposes. Uh so,
we've already established a lot of those
principles, but the idea that there's
going to be territory is one that
currently the outer space treaty, um I I
would argue thankfully kind of
establishes is not one that we're going
to be competing over.
>> How often do you think about the
economic impacts of an alien invasion?
>> Um
you know, only on Fridays.
Um you know,
uh it's a thought
>> like a thought experiment that they
assign to all NASA economists?
>> You know, it's a great point. Uh you
know, if when the agency reestablishes
the position, we should absolutely make
that a a requirement of uh you know,
reporting out on that. Obviously, uh an
alien invasion would probably be uh
probably be pretty uh catastrophic. Uh
Uh I would certainly recommend to any
listeners,
um you know, the Three-Body Problem
uh series by Cixin Liu. Uh if they
haven't read it, it's absolutely
fantastic and uh you know, makes a
pretty clear case that uh it'd be a
rough time.
>> All right. Uh Alex, thank you so much
for coming on Off Lots. Thank you for
coming to our party. I'm so glad we
actually met and uh I did get to ask you
the question of what it is that you do.
So, really appreciate it.
>> Thanks. It was a real pleasure.
>> Joe, that was fascinating. I mean, part
of me just like hearing what we're up to
now when it comes to space exploration.
And the answer turns out is, you know, a
decent amount. Um there are so many
questions that we didn't even get to. I
kind of wanted to ask for an economist's
take on the procurement process of NASA
as well, but we're going to have to have
Alex back on.
>> Procurement is actually
I want to do more on that specifically
because I imagine that there's a lot of
sort of small startups in both the sort
of space and defense area. I mean, we
know there's a lot of defense tech
startups. And I assume there's a lot of
space tech startups. How you actually
evaluate those ones? I mean, it's
actually really impressive thinking
about funding uh backing SpaceX in 2008
when it was long before they had sort of
proven that they could do reusable
rockets at scale. And now we've all seen
the videos and they still blow my mind
every single time. That was a really
good bet. And it was like, you know, I'm
sure a lot of people thought that that
was completely impossible or whatever
very recently in history. So, that's
pretty extraordinary. Um
I am also I'm still and I think that's
right. I looked up this chart again. Uh
and Wikipedia page. 4 and 1/2% of 1.1%
of the entire federal budget was NASA,
which is seems like so hard to believe
right now that this was like a really
big part of what the government was
spending money on.
>> Well, this is the thing. If you couch it
in existential terms, then, you know,
the upward limit of your budget becomes
I guess not infinity, but you know, 4%
pretty good.
>> I I do wonder like it does not seem
implausible to me that we have another
Sputnik moment with China. What if like
tomorrow they're like, oh we're landing
we're landing
>> thing I want to ask about how NASA
differs from China's space agency.
>> But look cuz what if like you know,
they're like, oh yeah, we have we have
someone landing on the moon next week or
something like that. Like seems
plausible at some point. They they
figured out
>> suddenly builds a space elevator, we
find out about it.
>> They figured out reusable rocket suit.
You know what the name of their uh
reusable rocket is?
>> What?
>> The Long March 10.
>> Really?
>> Yeah.
>> That's good.
>> Yeah, it's a good name.
Um
Anyway, yeah, I thought that was a great
conversation and I just want to say like
I don't you know, I'm pretty skeptical
of the fact that anytime soon we're
going to get like actual economic
productivity out of space whether it's
from mining or I don't know. Maybe the
data center thing will happen, but I'm
still pro spending money on going to
space just for the sake of it. I think
it's I think it's inspiring if we saw
some some people land on the moon and
hang out there for a while.
>> Well, I mean
>> be in budget such better video
condition. You know, what I'm saying?
Like those it wouldn't be those you
know, we could see it in high def and
they could do stuff instead of those
grainy things that maybe some people
were thought shot on like a set.
>> So, why don't you just use AI to pretend
to be on the moon?
>> I want to see it.
>> Would you go?
>> To the moon?
>> Yeah.
>> It depends on how far developed that
particular technology is.
>> I would definitely go. I mean as long as
I thought it was like plausible and
other people were going I I'd go.
>> I would need a certain amount of
successful missions before I agree to
You'd be on the first one.
>> I'd be on the first one. Let's do it.
>> Yeah, all right. All right. Well, in the
name of All Bots maybe I would consider.
>> Yeah, for for the for con do it for
content.
>> that's right. Okay, shall we leave it
there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the All
Bots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway. You can
follow me at Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Wiesenthal. You can follow
me at The Stalwart. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Arman, Dash
Bennett at Dash Bot, and Kilburgs at
Kilburgs.
>> And for more Odd Lots content, you
should definitely check out our daily
newsletter. You can find that at
bloomberg.com/odd
lots.
>> And you can chat about all these topics
24/7 in our Discord discord.gg/odd
lots.
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please like the video or leave a
comment or better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.